In this video, we'll learn
what polymorphism is and how it
can help us better develop our
object-oriented applications.
Polymorphism is a fundamental part
of object-oriented programming.
There are several types of
polymorphism in c++, and we've
already learned about two of them
when we overloaded functions and
when we overloaded operators.
These are considered forms
of compile-time polymorphism.
You might see the terms compile time,
early binding and static binding.
These terms all mean the same thing.
They simply mean before
the program executes.
In other words, something
the compiler takes care of
way before the program runs.
Runtime, late binding and dynamic
binding all refer to the association
of what the programmer wants
to do with how to do it but at
runtime as the program executes.
We'll see some examples in a few
slides that will make this very clear.
Polymorphism allows us to think more
abstractly when we write programs.
We can think deposit or print or
draw instead of thinking in specific
versions of deposit, print and draw.
So I can simply think deposit
a 1000 dollars to this account.
And I don't have to worry
about what kind of count it is.
I'll be sure that the correct deposit
function will be called depending
on what type of account I have.
And this is all determined at Runtime.
In c++ the default type of
binding is static binding.
This makes sense since c++ is
all about efficiency and static
binding is done before runtime so
programs can be as fast as possible.
However, sometimes we want to
defer decisions until run time.
In c++ we can opt into this behavior
by using base class pointers
or references and declaring our
functions as virtual functions.
We'll see the details and syntax
of this later in this section.
But first, let's look at the types of
polymorphism that c++ provides so that
we can put this section in context.
Here's a simple chart that shows
the types of polymorphism in c++.
There are two types of polymorphism,
compile-time and runtime.
Compile-time polymorphism includes
what we've already learned in
this course, function overloading
and operator overloading.
We also have runtime polymorphism,
and that's what this section
of the course will focus on.
We achieve runtime polymorphism
by overriding functions and
using inheritance, using virtual
functions and then having base
class pointers and references.
I think the best way to
understand dynamic polymorphism
is to use a simple example.
First, let's look at a non-polymorphic
example that uses static binding.
In this case, we have an
account hierarchy using public
inheritance as you can see on
the right side of the slide.
We'll assume that every type of
account class has its own version
of the withdraw method and each
withdraw method is different
depending on the type of account.
So let's create four objects,
one for each type of account
and call their withdraw methods.
When we call account a's
withdraw method, it will
call accounts withdraw.
This makes sense since
a is an account object.
The compiler knows this and
binds this method call at
compile-time or statically.
The same applies to objects b c and d.
In each case, the compiler is
binding the calls to withdraw
based on the information that it
has about the objects when they
were declared in the source code.
So b withdrawal calls savings
withdraw, c withdraw calls
checking withdraw, and d
withdraw calls trust withdraw.
So far so good.
It's what we've done
and what we expect.
But now let's take a
look at the pointer p.
P is a pointer to an account object.
So p contains the address
of an account object.
Now we create a trust account
dynamically on the heap and
assign its address to p.
Is this legal?
Sure, p can hold addresses of
accounts and trust is an account.
The inheritance hierarchy tells us so.
So what happens when we call
the withdrawal method for
the object pointed to by p?
Well, we're using static binding
by default so the compiler doesn't
really know what type of account
object p is pointing to at runtime.
It doesn't really care.
All it knows is that p is
pointing to an account.
So it will call the
account withdraw method.
This is probably not what we expected.
It certainly isn't what we
wanted since we want the trust
object on the heap to use
its own version of withdraw.
Please be sure that you
understand this simple example
since it's fundamental to
understanding dynamic polymorphism.
Remember, all the compiler knows is
that p is a pointer to an account
so it will bind the withdraw
method to the account classes
withdraw method at compile time.
Let's see another problem with
static binding in the same context.
In this example, we have
the same class hierarchy.
And let's suppose that each
account class has its own version
of a display method that displays
account information based on
the type of account we have.
So let's create a simple c++ function
called display account, and it expects
a reference to an account object.
Since all our derived classes
are accounts, we can pass any of
them into this function, and this
function will call the display method
for the account object passed in.
So you can see that the code creates
four objects: a b c and d, one for
each type of account and then it calls
display account and passes in each
of these objects to the function.
The behavior you get from
the display account function
may not be what you expect.
But by default c++ is doing
exactly what it's supposed
to do, static binding.
When the compiler sees the call
to acc.display in the display
account function, it will bind
the call to accounts display.
So accounts display method will
be called regardless of what
object was passed in, and our
display will only display whatever
is in the account part of us.
There is a way for c++ to ask the
account object being passed in,
hey, what kind of account are you.
And then depending on that, we can
have if else statements that call
the appropriate display methods.
That's bad coding practice, and
it also makes us program less
abstractly since then we've got to
figure out what kind of object we've
got and then call its functions.
There's a better way.
That's where runtime
polymorphism comes in.
Let's see how this same example works
with runtime or dynamic polymorphism.
Now let's see the same example
using polymorphic functions.
Here we see the same account class
hierarchy except that this time we've
opted into runtime polymorphism.
We'll see how in a few videos,
but notice that the withdraw
methods in the class diagram
are now virtual functions.
This allows us to use runtime
polymorphism when using base
class pointers or references.
Let's look at the same
example as before.
Notice that the four count
objects: a b c and d, have
exactly the same behavior.
Since we're not using base class
pointers or references, these
examples are all statically
bound just like before.
But now let's look at the pointer p.
In this case, when we call the
withdraw method of the object
pointed to by p, the trust
withdraw method will be called.
That's what we want
and that's pretty cool.
The idea of using virtual functions
tells the compiler not to bind the
calling compile time but instead
defer the binding to runtime.
And at runtime, a check will
occur to see exactly what p
is pointing to and then that
object's method will be called.
In this case, the
trust withdraw method.
Let's see the other example.
Again, now we have virtual display
functions in our account class.
So whenever we use a pointer
or a reference to a base
class, the binding is done at
runtime, not at compile time.
So now we create four objects:
a b c and d, each as a
different type of account.
Now when we pass these objects
to the display account function,
the binding of acc.display will
take place at runtime and call
the display method based on the
type of object being passed in.
That's pretty cool and
very, very powerful.
I can now write functions, methods
and data structures that use
pointers and references to base class
objects, and I know that the correct
methods will be called at runtime.
Remember, that account class
hierarchy we did in the last
sections challenge, it used static
binding since we hadn't learned
about dynamic polymorphism yet.
Remember, all those utility
functions that we wrote, that
were all pretty much the same.
Now we could write just one
version, and they'll work with
all the account types once we
convert that account hierarchy
to use polymorphic functions.
Fantastic.
In the next video we'll go
over how we can use base class
pointers in a little more detail.
Before we do the next video,
let's go over here to the IDE
and walk through this problem.
This is the same problem we
had with the account class.
And what I'm doing here I'm just
creating a base and a derived class
to absolutely show you and walk
you through what's going on here.
I'm in the section 16 workspace
in the problem project so.
What have I got?
Well, you can see here it's can't
get much simpler than this hierarchy.
I've got a base class right
here, and it's got one public
method called say hello.
That's all.
And all it says is
hello I'm a base class.
Then I've got a derived class,
that's derived publicly from base.
And it's got the same method
void say hello, but it says
hello I'm a derived class object.
That's it.
Then I've got this function
right here that I've written.
This is not a member function, this
is just a regular c++ function.
It's called greetings, and it
expects a base object by reference.
Now remember, a derived is a base.
So I can pass in either a
derived object or a base
object to this function.
And this function is simply
going to say greetings, and then
it's going to call the specific
objects say hello method.
So what do we expect here?
Well, the idea would be that if I
have a derived object and i pass
it into this function right here,
I'd say greetings and then hello
I'm a derived class object, but
that's not what happens because
we're doing static binding.
So let's walk through this example.
It's really important that you
understand the static binding
version before we start talking
about the dynamic binding version.
Here's my main.
Let's create a base object,
we'll call it b, and we'll
simply call b.say hello.
What do we expect here?
Exactly what you would think, right.
Let me just scroll up just a
little bit, and I'm the compiler.
I'm looking in here.
There is no virtual -- we haven't
really talked about virtual yet, but
you'll see the word virtual in here
when we buy into dynamic polymorphism.
So the compiler sees
this class hierarchy.
It doesn't see anything virtual
so there's not going to be
any dynamic polymorphism here.
It knows that it needs to
bind everything statically.
And also, we're not coming
at this with a base pointer.
We have to have a base pointer, and
we'll talk a little bit about base
pointer more in the next video.
So this is really simple
for the compiler, right.
B.say hello okay.
Which say hello method do I bind?
This guy, right here.
How does it know?
Well, b is a base.
That's all the compiler
knows is this right here.
So that's what it's using.
And that's just going to say
hello I'm a base class object.
And let's do the same thing before we
run it, we'll do it again, and we'll
do it this time for a derived object.
So let's do that, we'll say derived d.
And we'll say d.say hello
again, same exact thing happens.
The compiler knows that d
is a type of derived, right.
Its type is derived.
So in this case, it's going to
bind this method right here.
Again, there's no pointers.
When there's no pointers and no
virtual methods, everything is static.
So if we run this, what we expect
is we expect this say hello to
say hi I'm a base class object and
this say hello here on line 29 to
say hi I'm a derived class object.
So let's run that.
And there's the output, hello
I'm a base class object and
hello I'm a derived class
object, exactly as we expect.
Okay, so now let's run into some
of the the issues that we'll run
into when we start using base
class pointers and references.
Why don't we do this
function first right here.
So suppose that I want
to call that function.
Remember, this is a
regular c++ function.
I'm going to call greetings, and
I'll pass in the base class to it.
I can do that because b is a base.
And then I'm going to call it again.
And I'm going to pass in d.
I can do that because a
derived is a base, right.
That's what my inheritance
hierarchy is doing for me.
So what I expect here would be for
the b to say greetings hello I'm
a bass and the d to say greetings
hello I'm a derived, but that's
not what happens because we've
got static binding going on.
So let's run this, and
you'll see the problem.
There you go, you can see
that right there those two
greetings is right here.
There's the output
greetings, hello I'm a bass.
And then greetings, hello I'm
a bass again even though I'm
passing or derived into it.
And we know now that the reason
that this is happening is I'll
scroll up just a little bit
is right here is the problem.
We're not using dynamic polymorphism.
And as far as the compiler
is concerned, obj is
a reference to a base.
That's all it knows.
That's all it cares about.
So right here that will always
bind to base say hello, and that's
why we're seeing that behavior.
Okay, the same thing happens
when we've got a base pointer.
And let's do that really quickly.
So suppose we have a pointer,
and we'll just call it ptr.
And in this case, ptr is a
pointer to a base object,
right, an object of that type.
And we can say new derived.
Now this sometimes confuses
students, but this makes perfect
sense, right, because think about
it sometimes you think about the
hierarchy, you get all confused.
Think about what this really says.
This really says that ptr can hold
the address of any base object, right.
Well derived is a base object.
A derived is a base that's what
the inheritance is telling me.
So what happens here is here's ptr.
Here is my derived object that
I'm creating on the heap, right.
And there's really nothing in
there right now because there's
no attributes or anything, but
this guy is pointing here, and
that's okay because this is a base.
So that's valid.
The compiler is happy about that.
But the problem comes in now
when I try to call ptr say hello.
We've got no dynamic polymorphism,
no polymorphic functions.
So what's going to happen
is the compiler sees ptr
is a pointer to a base.
It's all it knows.
So it's going to bind this
to base hello, always.
So we'll always bind
that to base say hello.
And again, this is
probably not what we want.
We want dynamic polymorphism to
figure out what I'm pointing to at
runtime and call that appropriately.
So let's run this one last time.
And let's see if we
get a run here, we do.
So here we go.
Let's walk through this one more time.
Here's b.say hello, hello on the base.
There's d.say hello,
hello I'm a drive.
That's all using static binding.
That's perfectly fine.
Now here I'm passing in a b and
a d to this method greetings.
In both cases, the compiler
doesn't know anything except that
that's a base, so it's binding
it to the say hello right here
on line 21 of the base class.
And then here's my pointer, and I'm
calling say hello through the pointer.
Again, even though I'm
pointing to a derived object
the compiler doesn't care.
This is not being deferred to
runtime so the compiler is binding
it right now at compile time.
Okay, this also -- you don't have
to use raw pointers for this.
We haven't talked about smart
pointers yet but we will.
And suppose I include memory that's
where the smart pointers live.
And I could scroll down here, and
I could say something -- like let
me just close this up a little, I
could say something like a std unique
pointer, and we can have a unique
pointer to a base, and we can call
this ptr1, and then we could call make
unique, which creates that pointer and
the pointer is a derived this time.
And we'll just empty
constructor right here.
So that'll create a smart pointer this
-- we'll talk about smart pointers later.
And then we could just say
ptr1, and we can call the say
hello method there, right.
Now obviously we've
got a pointer here so.
We really should free or delete
that pointer just so we are
consistent with best practices here.
We don't have to delete
smart pointers, they
take care of themselves.
So if we run this, you can see that
even with a smart pointer, there's
a regular pointer, there's a smart
pointer, they're both being statically
bound, just like you would expect.
All right, so in the next video,
we'll talk about this base
class pointer and see a little
bit more about how that works.